README.MD, before:

# ClinGen Curation Tracker

This project attempts to track curations being conducted by 
curators working for a Gene Clinicians Expert Panel (GCEP).

## Terms

* **Gene** - A gene. Usually represented by a [HGNC](https://www.genenames.org/) gene symbol.
* **Phenotype** - The set of observable characteristics of an individual resulting from the interaction of its genotype with the environment.
* **Disease Entity** - A disease of clinical interest. May be composed of many phenotypes.
* **Curation Curation** - A gene & disease entity pair.
* **ExpertPanel** - AKA GCEP. A group of experts consulting on the curation of a curation curation.
* **WorkingGroup** - A group working on genetic disorders. Has many ExpertPanels.

## Backend Architecture
The backend of this application is mostly idiomatic Laravel.  Requests are routed to controllers which either do the work themselves or delegate to jobs (often run synchronously).

### Model Revisions
Revision of models is tracked using the [venturecraft/revisionable](https://github.com/VentureCraft/revisionable) package.  This package stores a record in the revisions table for every create, update, and delete operation on a model.  records in the `revisions` table can be used to try to figure what happened when and who did it.

### Admin dashboard
The admin dashboard is built using the [Laravel Backpack](https://backpackforlaravel.com/) library.  Users with admin or programmer roles have access to the admin dashboard and can perform various tasks.

### Roles & Permissions
System roles and permissions in the GT are handled by [Spatie's laravel-permissions](https://github.com/spatie/laravel-permission/) package.

See [Roles & Permissions docs](/documentation/roles-and-permissions.md) for details

### Expert Panel Membership
Users can be members of 0 or more expert panels.

Expert panel access options are fairly rudimentary.  A user can have 0-3 options levels for the expert panel, though several overlap:
* Curator - allows the user to create & update curations they have created for the group.
* Edit Curations - allows the user to create & update any curation in the group.
* Coordinator - allows the user to create & update any curation in the group AND allows downloading of exports AND indicates this user will recieve notifiations about the expert panel and their curations.

Users can be assigned to expert panels and granted access on their edit screen in the admin section.

### Clingen DataExchange Integration
The ClinGen Data Exchange (DX) is a [Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) message broker run by the Broad Grant, hosted on https://conflluent.io.

The GT integrates with the DX to publish messages about pre-curation records on the `precuration-events` topic. 

The GT consumes data from the following topics:
* `gene-validity-events` - Messages GCI gene curations are used to link GT pre-curations to GCI gene curations and keep the two synchronized.
* `mondo-notifications` - Although the GT is monitoring the current state of MonDO to notify coordinators about changes, it also consumes messages from the `mondo-notifications` topic produced by the Broad team.  Messages from this topic are used to keep coordinators up to date on proposed changes to the MonDO terms.

For details about the implementation of the integration see the [DX implementation docs](/documentation/dx-integration.md).

### Notifications
Most notifications in the GT are "digestible" meaning they implement `App\Notifications\DigestibleNotificationInterface` and are sent in a weekly digest format.

Digestible notifications are stored to the database when they are "sent".  Once a week `App\Console\Commands\SendNotificationDigest` is invoked by the Laravel task scheduler which aggregates pending notifications for each user and sends them via email.

### External API
An external API has been added to allow third parties to request data from the GT.  This was created to facilitate the GCI's integration with the GT.

Clients of the external api must have an entry in the api_clients table and have been granted a personal access token.

Clients can be created in one of two ways:
1. by running `php artisan api-client:create <client-name> <client-email>` command.  This will print the new client id.
2. Using the [admin UI](https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/admin/api-client)

Tokens can be created for the client by 
1. running `php artisan api-client:create-token <client-id> <token-name>`.  
2. clicking the 'Create access token' link for the api-client in the [admin UI](https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/admin/api-client).

Tokens will only be displayed immediately after creation.  The token should be copied and securely conveyed to the client.  There is not limit to the number of tokens a an api-client can have.

api-clients must include their access token in the header of requests:

```
curl -i -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" -H "Accept: application/json" https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/api/v1/pre-curations/10
```

Currently only two endpoints are supported:
* GET - `pre-curations` - Returns a paginated list of pre-curation summaries.
* GET - `pre-curations/[pre-curation-id]` - Returns a complete pre-curation record where `[pre-curation-id]`is id either:
    * The numeric id of the GT pre-curation record
    * The uuid of the GT pre-curation record
    * The gci gdm-uuid of the curation associated to the pre-curation

Full OpenApi documentation for the external API can be found at the api root: https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/api/v1/.  Note that authentication is required to access the API documentation.


### Data integrations
#### OMIMs
A copy of all OMIM phenotypes is updated daily at 3am by a scheduled task that runs the `App\Console\Commands\UpdateOmimData` command followed by `App\Console\Commands\UpdateOmimMovedAndRemoved`.  These commands can also be run manaully from the command line: `php artisan omim:update-data` and `php artisan omim:check-moved-and-removed` respectively.

Phenotypes are linked to genes in the database.

Updates to OMIM phenotype status or nomenclature will trigger notifications to coordinators if those phenotypes are connected to any pre-curations in the GT

#### HGNC
A copy of HGNC data is updated daily at 1am by a scheduled task that runs `App\Hgnc\Artisan\ImportHgncCustomDownload`. 

#### MonDO
A copy of all MonDO terms is updated daily at 2am by a scheduld task that runs `App\Console\Commands\Mondo\UpdateMondoData`.

Updates to disease nomenclature are stored to the database to be sent with the weekly digest.  Notifications about term obsoletion are sent to coordinators immediately.

## Frontend Architecture
The frontend client is built using [Vue 2](https://v2.vuejs.org/) with [vue-router v3](https://v3.router.vuejs.org/) for client side routing, vuex v3](https://v3.vuex.vuejs.org/) as a global store, and the [bootstrap-vue](https://bootstrap-vue.org/) component library.j

## DevOps
The demo and production instances of the GPM are hosted on UNC's [Cloudapps OpenShift cluster](https://console.cloudapps.unc.edu) in the `dept-gpm` project.  OpenShift is RedHat's value-add to the Kubernetes open source project.  You're better off referencing Kubernetes documentation for anything that is not a proprietary OpenShift thing (i.e. Builds, BuildConfigs, etc.).

### Architecture
At a high level, the project is composed of: 
* MySQL server: persistent store for the application. Based on the [jward3/openshift-mysql](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/jward3/php) image.
* Redis server: application cache, and queue
* Laravel app, running in three "roles", web app, scheduled task runner, and queue worker. Based on the [jward3/php](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/jward3/php) image.
* A cronjob that backs up the database and writes to a persistent volume.
* A cronjob that cleans database backups.

This repository is built into a docker image via the *app* build config and stored in the app ImageStream.

The application image is deployed by three separate DeploymentConfigs to use the Laravel app in different contexts:
* `app` - Runs an apache web server with php.  This is deployment of the web-accessible app.
* `schuduler` - Runs `php artisan schudule:run` every minute to ensure scheduled tasks are executed. See the [Laravel scheduled docs](https://laravel.com/docs/8.x/scheduling) for details.
* `queue` - Starts a queue worker `php artisan queue:work` which processes jobs queued to the redis DeploymentConfig.  See https://laravel.com/docs/8.x/queues for details on queued jobs

The `CMD` for the image runs `.docker/start.sh` which runs the appropriate command based on the `CONTAINER_ROLE` environment variable.  Valid container roles include  `app`, `queue`, and `scheduler`.

### Topics
* [Updating SSL Certificates](documentation/ssl-cert-updated.md)


## Development Setup
```
git clone [git@bitbucket.org](mailto:git@bitbucket.org):shepsweb/clingen.git # need to change this to github!
cd clingen
composer install
yarn install
cp .env.example .env # and updated your db settings etc. *Don't forget your OMIM_API_KEY*
php artisan key:generate
php artisan passport:keys  # generates keys for api auth. see [https://laravel.com/docs/5.6/passport](https://laravel.com/docs/5.6/passport) for details
```

## Other Resources

* <b>[OMIM](https://www.omim.org/)</b> - Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man catalog of genes and genetic disorders
* <b>[MONDO](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/mondo)</b> - Monarch Disease Ontology: ontology of disease ontologies
* <b>[GCI](https://curation.clinicalgenome.org/)</b> - DB and interface for ClinGen Curators to manage classification of curation curations

Commit message:

Add links to gt-precuration examples and schema to readme.

README.MD, after:

# ClinGen Curation Tracker

This project attempts to track curations being conducted by 
curators working for a Gene Clinicians Expert Panel (GCEP).

## Terms

* **Gene** - A gene. Usually represented by a [HGNC](https://www.genenames.org/) gene symbol.
* **Phenotype** - The set of observable characteristics of an individual resulting from the interaction of its genotype with the environment.
* **Disease Entity** - A disease of clinical interest. May be composed of many phenotypes.
* **Curation Curation** - A gene & disease entity pair.
* **ExpertPanel** - AKA GCEP. A group of experts consulting on the curation of a curation curation.
* **WorkingGroup** - A group working on genetic disorders. Has many ExpertPanels.

## Backend Architecture
The backend of this application is mostly idiomatic Laravel.  Requests are routed to controllers which either do the work themselves or delegate to jobs (often run synchronously).

### Model Revisions
Revision of models is tracked using the [venturecraft/revisionable](https://github.com/VentureCraft/revisionable) package.  This package stores a record in the revisions table for every create, update, and delete operation on a model.  records in the `revisions` table can be used to try to figure what happened when and who did it.

### Admin dashboard
The admin dashboard is built using the [Laravel Backpack](https://backpackforlaravel.com/) library.  Users with admin or programmer roles have access to the admin dashboard and can perform various tasks.

### Roles & Permissions
System roles and permissions in the GT are handled by [Spatie's laravel-permissions](https://github.com/spatie/laravel-permission/) package.

See [Roles & Permissions docs](/documentation/roles-and-permissions.md) for details

### Expert Panel Membership
Users can be members of 0 or more expert panels.

Expert panel access options are fairly rudimentary.  A user can have 0-3 options levels for the expert panel, though several overlap:
* Curator - allows the user to create & update curations they have created for the group.
* Edit Curations - allows the user to create & update any curation in the group.
* Coordinator - allows the user to create & update any curation in the group AND allows downloading of exports AND indicates this user will recieve notifiations about the expert panel and their curations.

Users can be assigned to expert panels and granted access on their edit screen in the admin section.

### Clingen DataExchange Integration
The ClinGen Data Exchange (DX) is a [Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) message broker run by the Broad Grant, hosted on https://conflluent.io.

The GT integrates with the DX to publish messages about pre-curation records on the `gt-precuration-events` topic. See the [examples](public/data-exchange/gt-precuration-events-example.json) and a [json schema](public/data-exchange/gt-precuration-events-schema.json) details about `gt-precuration-events`

The GT consumes data from the following topics:
* `gene-validity-events` - Messages GCI gene curations are used to link GT pre-curations to GCI gene curations and keep the two synchronized.
* `mondo-notifications` - Although the GT is monitoring the current state of MonDO to notify coordinators about changes, it also consumes messages from the `mondo-notifications` topic produced by the Broad team.  Messages from this topic are used to keep coordinators up to date on proposed changes to the MonDO terms.

For details about the implementation of the integration see the [DX implementation docs](/documentation/dx-integration.md).

### Notifications
Most notifications in the GT are "digestible" meaning they implement `App\Notifications\DigestibleNotificationInterface` and are sent in a weekly digest format.

Digestible notifications are stored to the database when they are "sent".  Once a week `App\Console\Commands\SendNotificationDigest` is invoked by the Laravel task scheduler which aggregates pending notifications for each user and sends them via email.

### External API
An external API has been added to allow third parties to request data from the GT.  This was created to facilitate the GCI's integration with the GT.

Clients of the external api must have an entry in the api_clients table and have been granted a personal access token.

Clients can be created in one of two ways:
1. by running `php artisan api-client:create <client-name> <client-email>` command.  This will print the new client id.
2. Using the [admin UI](https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/admin/api-client)

Tokens can be created for the client by 
1. running `php artisan api-client:create-token <client-id> <token-name>`.  
2. clicking the 'Create access token' link for the api-client in the [admin UI](https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/admin/api-client).

Tokens will only be displayed immediately after creation.  The token should be copied and securely conveyed to the client.  There is not limit to the number of tokens a an api-client can have.

api-clients must include their access token in the header of requests:

```
curl -i -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" -H "Accept: application/json" https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/api/v1/pre-curations/10
```

Currently only two endpoints are supported:
* GET - `pre-curations` - Returns a paginated list of pre-curation summaries.
* GET - `pre-curations/[pre-curation-id]` - Returns a complete pre-curation record where `[pre-curation-id]`is id either:
    * The numeric id of the GT pre-curation record
    * The uuid of the GT pre-curation record
    * The gci gdm-uuid of the curation associated to the pre-curation

Full OpenApi documentation for the external API can be found at the api root: https://gene-tracker.clinicalgenome.org/api/v1/.  Note that authentication is required to access the API documentation.


### Data integrations
#### OMIMs
A copy of all OMIM phenotypes is updated daily at 3am by a scheduled task that runs the `App\Console\Commands\UpdateOmimData` command followed by `App\Console\Commands\UpdateOmimMovedAndRemoved`.  These commands can also be run manaully from the command line: `php artisan omim:update-data` and `php artisan omim:check-moved-and-removed` respectively.

Phenotypes are linked to genes in the database.

Updates to OMIM phenotype status or nomenclature will trigger notifications to coordinators if those phenotypes are connected to any pre-curations in the GT

#### HGNC
A copy of HGNC data is updated daily at 1am by a scheduled task that runs `App\Hgnc\Artisan\ImportHgncCustomDownload`. 

#### MonDO
A copy of all MonDO terms is updated daily at 2am by a scheduld task that runs `App\Console\Commands\Mondo\UpdateMondoData`.

Updates to disease nomenclature are stored to the database to be sent with the weekly digest.  Notifications about term obsoletion are sent to coordinators immediately.

## Frontend Architecture
The frontend client is built using [Vue 2](https://v2.vuejs.org/) with [vue-router v3](https://v3.router.vuejs.org/) for client side routing, vuex v3](https://v3.vuex.vuejs.org/) as a global store, and the [bootstrap-vue](https://bootstrap-vue.org/) component library.j

## DevOps
The demo and production instances of the GPM are hosted on UNC's [Cloudapps OpenShift cluster](https://console.cloudapps.unc.edu) in the `dept-gpm` project.  OpenShift is RedHat's value-add to the Kubernetes open source project.  You're better off referencing Kubernetes documentation for anything that is not a proprietary OpenShift thing (i.e. Builds, BuildConfigs, etc.).

### Architecture
At a high level, the project is composed of: 
* MySQL server: persistent store for the application. Based on the [jward3/openshift-mysql](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/jward3/php) image.
* Redis server: application cache, and queue
* Laravel app, running in three "roles", web app, scheduled task runner, and queue worker. Based on the [jward3/php](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/jward3/php) image.
* A cronjob that backs up the database and writes to a persistent volume.
* A cronjob that cleans database backups.

This repository is built into a docker image via the *app* build config and stored in the app ImageStream.

The application image is deployed by three separate DeploymentConfigs to use the Laravel app in different contexts:
* `app` - Runs an apache web server with php.  This is deployment of the web-accessible app.
* `schuduler` - Runs `php artisan schudule:run` every minute to ensure scheduled tasks are executed. See the [Laravel scheduled docs](https://laravel.com/docs/8.x/scheduling) for details.
* `queue` - Starts a queue worker `php artisan queue:work` which processes jobs queued to the redis DeploymentConfig.  See https://laravel.com/docs/8.x/queues for details on queued jobs

The `CMD` for the image runs `.docker/start.sh` which runs the appropriate command based on the `CONTAINER_ROLE` environment variable.  Valid container roles include  `app`, `queue`, and `scheduler`.

### Topics
* [Updating SSL Certificates](documentation/ssl-cert-updated.md)


## Development Setup
```
git clone [git@bitbucket.org](mailto:git@bitbucket.org):shepsweb/clingen.git # need to change this to github!
cd clingen
composer install
yarn install
cp .env.example .env # and updated your db settings etc. *Don't forget your OMIM_API_KEY*
php artisan key:generate
php artisan passport:keys  # generates keys for api auth. see [https://laravel.com/docs/5.6/passport](https://laravel.com/docs/5.6/passport) for details
```

## Other Resources

* <b>[OMIM](https://www.omim.org/)</b> - Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man catalog of genes and genetic disorders
* <b>[MONDO](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/mondo)</b> - Monarch Disease Ontology: ontology of disease ontologies
* <b>[GCI](https://curation.clinicalgenome.org/)</b> - DB and interface for ClinGen Curators to manage classification of curation curations
